README.md, before:

# Java Skills Teaching Project

A comprehensive multi-module Gradle project designed for Java skills video content. This project demonstrates essential Java concepts through practical examples using a consistent Employee Management System theme, covering 26+ topics from basic syntax to advanced architecture patterns.

## Project Overview

This project is structured as a Gradle multi-module build with Java 21, designed for **skill-gap filling** where developers can jump to specific topics they need to learn. Each topic provides complete, immediately applicable knowledge with production-ready code examples.

## 🎬 Production Status: READY FOR RECORDING

**All content complete with professional video production formatting:**
- ✅ **27 complete video topics** with comprehensive slides, scripts, and working code
- ✅ **Professional slide naming** with topic numbers (e.g., `slides_01_naming_conventions.md`)
- ✅ **Custom script2text command** for teleprompter conversion (`/script2text <number>`)
- ✅ **Working code examples** for every concept demonstrated
- ✅ **No production blockers** - all slide references verified and coordinated

## 🚀 Modern Java 21 Approach

**All code and slides showcase current Java best practices:**
- ✅ **Java 21 LTS features** - var, text blocks, records, switch expressions, pattern matching
- ✅ **Modern syntax throughout** - List.of(), String.formatted(), enhanced enums
- ✅ **Visual slide enhancements** - Color-highlighted naming conventions (#00D4FF)
- ✅ **Progressive disclosure** - Proper v-click sequencing for better presentation flow
- ✅ **Split content appropriately** - No slide overflow issues, readable formatting
- ✅ **Production-quality code** - Eliminates duplication, follows current best practices

## 📊 Slides and Presentations

The project includes comprehensive Slidev-powered slides for all 26+ topics:

### Foundations Topics (1-7 + Bonus 7B)
All slides follow the **new naming convention** with topic numbers for easy reference:
- **slides_01_naming_conventions.md** - Java naming standards and conventions
- **slides_02_escape_characters.md** - String escape sequences and special characters
- **slides_03_operator_precedence.md** - Expression evaluation and precedence rules
- **slides_04_scanner_input.md** - Console input with Scanner class
- **slides_05_nested_loops.md** - Nested loops for complex data processing (patterns, pairing, duplicates)
- **slides_06_2d_arrays.md** - Two-dimensional arrays for tabular data (quarterly sales analysis)
- **slides_07_file_writer.md** - Traditional file I/O with FileWriter/BufferedWriter
- **slides_07b_modern_file_io.md** - **BONUS**: Modern NIO.2 file operations

### Intermediate Topics (8-18)
- **slides_08_access_modifiers.md** - Java visibility and encapsulation
- **slides_09_composition.md** - Object composition and has-a relationships
- **slides_10_var_keyword.md** - Local variable type inference in Java 10+
- **slides_11_records.md** - Java records for immutable data
- **slides_12_reflection_api.md** - Runtime class inspection and manipulation
- **slides_13_singleton_pattern.md** - Thread-safe singleton implementations
- **slides_14_strategy_pattern.md** - Strategy pattern for algorithm selection
- **slides_15_factory_pattern.md** - Factory pattern for object creation
- **slides_16_srp.md** - Single Responsibility Principle
- **slides_17_ocp.md** - Open/Closed Principle
- **slides_18_refactoring.md** - Code refactoring best practices

### Advanced Topics (19-26)
- **slides_19_logging_frameworks.md** - SLF4J, Logback, and modern logging
- **slides_20_rest_api_consumer.md** - HTTP client and REST API consumption
- **slides_21_rest_service_creator.md** - Spring Boot REST service creation
- **slides_22_input_validation.md** - Security validation and XSS/SQL injection prevention
- **slides_23_cryptographic_apis.md** - Encryption, hashing, and digital signatures
- **slides_24_git_collaboration.md** - Version control and team workflows
- **slides_25_microservices.md** - Distributed systems with Spring Boot
- **slides_26_reactive_programming.md** - Async programming with Project Reactor

### Video Scripts (Production Ready)
- **scripts/** directory contains 27 professional video scripts
- **All scripts formatted** with scene structure and proper slide callouts
- **Split topics** 5&6 available as separate scripts for individual videos
- **Bonus topic 7B** for modern NIO.2 file operations included
- **Custom teleprompter conversion** using `/script2text <number>` command
- **package.json** - Slidev dependencies and build scripts

### Running Slides
```bash
npm install          # Install Slidev dependencies
npm run dev         # Start development server with hot reload
npm run build       # Build static presentation
npm run export      # Export to PDF
```

## Module Structure

**Organized into 6 modules covering 27 video topics with 100% functional code:**

### 📚 **foundations** - Basic Java Concepts (Videos 1-7 + Bonus 7B)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Fully Tested (10/10 tests passing)**

- **com.oreilly.javaskills.NamingConventions.java** - Proper Java naming conventions with good/bad examples
- **StringFormatting.java** - String concatenation, formatting, text blocks, StringBuilder, String.join(), StringJoiner, escape characters, SLF4J logging
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.OperatorPrecedenceTest.java** - JUnit tests demonstrating operator precedence rules with arithmetic, boolean, assignment, ternary, increment/decrement, modulus, and Math.pow() examples
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeInput.java** - Scanner input with try-with-resources, robust validation loops, and user-friendly error handling for all data types
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.NestedLoopsDemo.java** - Nested loops without 2D arrays (mentorship pairing, schedules, duplicates)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.PatternPrinting.java** - Visual pattern creation exercise (triangles, diamonds, checkerboards)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeRoster.java** - 2D arrays for tabular data with nested loop processing
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.TwoDArrayExercise.java** - Quarterly sales analysis using 2D arrays (row/column totals, growth rates)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeFileWriter.java** - Traditional file I/O (CSV, JSON with text blocks, Apache Commons IO)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.FileWriterExercise.java** - Traditional file I/O exercise (reports, logs, CSV, text blocks comparison)
- **EmployeeLogger.java** - Comprehensive logging examples with SLF4J/Logback, MDC, different log levels
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.ModernEmployeeFileManager.java** - **BONUS**: Modern NIO.2 file operations (Java 7+)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.ModernFileIOExercise.java** - Modern NIO.2 exercise (one-line operations, streams, directory walking)
- **FileIOComparison.java** - Side-by-side comparison of traditional vs modern file I/O approaches
- **EmployeeApiClient.java** - HTTP client for consuming REST APIs (Java 11+ HttpClient)
- **RestServiceConcepts.java** - REST service patterns and concepts demonstration
- **InputValidation.java** - Security validation, XSS/SQL injection prevention
- **CryptographicAPIs.java** - Encryption, hashing, digital signatures (PBKDF2, AES, RSA)
- **MicroservicesConcepts.java** - Microservices patterns (service discovery, load balancing, circuit breaker)
- **ReactiveConcepts.java** - Reactive programming patterns (streams, backpressure, composition)

### 🏗️ **oop-core** - Object-Oriented Programming (Videos 8-12)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Fully Tested (13/13 tests passing)**

- **Employee.java** - Encapsulation, validation, business logic
- **Address.java** - Composition example with proper validation
- **Department.java** - Has-a relationships, collections, business methods
- **ModernJavaFeatures.java** - var keyword, records, pattern matching, text blocks

### 🎨 **design-patterns** - Design Patterns (Videos 13-15)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Mostly Tested (12/15 tests passing)**

- **DatabaseConnection.java** - Thread-safe Singleton pattern
- **SalaryCalculator.java** - Strategy pattern (Hourly, Salaried, Commission)
- **EmployeeFactory.java** - Factory pattern (Developer, Manager, Intern, Sales)

**Note**: 3 minor database connection test failures are non-critical - all pattern demonstrations work perfectly for video content.

### ⚖️ **solid-principles** - SOLID Design Principles (Videos 16-17)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Functional (working code examples)**

- **SRPEmployeeService.java** - Single Responsibility Principle with separated concerns
- **OpenClosedPrinciple.java** - Open/Closed Principle with extensible employee types

### 🌐 **web-services** - Spring Boot REST & Reactive (Videos 20, 25-26)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Builds Successfully**

- **WebServicesApplication.java** - Spring Boot 3.5.3 main application
- **EmployeeApiClient.java** - HTTP client for consuming REST APIs (Java 11+ HttpClient)
- **MicroservicesDemo.java** - Spring Cloud microservices patterns (Eureka, Circuit Breaker, etc.)
- **ReactiveDemo.java** - Project Reactor examples (Mono, Flux, WebFlux)

### 🔒 **security** - Security Layered onto Web Services (Videos 22-23)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Builds Successfully**

- **SecurityApplication.java** - Spring Boot Security main application
- **InputValidation.java** - XSS/SQL injection prevention techniques
- **CryptographicAPIs.java** - PBKDF2, AES, RSA encryption and digital signatures
- **SecurityController.java** - REST endpoints demonstrating security integration

## Technology Stack (2025 Latest)

### Core Framework Versions
- **Java**: 21 (LTS)
- **Spring Boot**: 3.5.3 (Latest 2025)
- **Gradle**: 8.14.2 (June 2025)

### Testing with BOMs (Best Practice)
```gradle
// Modern dependency management using BOMs
testImplementation platform('org.junit:junit-bom:5.11.0')
testImplementation platform('org.mockito:mockito-bom:5.18.0')
testImplementation 'org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter'
testImplementation 'org.mockito:mockito-core'
```

### Key Libraries
- **Jackson**: 2.19.1 (with jackson-bom)
- **SLF4J**: 2.0.17
- **Logback**: 1.5.18
- **AssertJ**: 3.26.3
- **Apache Commons IO**: 2.19.0

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Java 21 or higher
- Gradle 8.14+ (or use included wrapper)

### Running the Project

```bash
# Build all modules
gradle build

# Run specific examples
gradle runExample -Pmodule=foundations -PmainClass=com.oreilly.javaskills.NamingConventions
gradle runExample -Pmodule=oop-core -PmainClass=ModernJavaFeatures
gradle runExample -Pmodule=design-patterns -PmainClass=StrategyPatternDemo

# Run tests
gradle test

# Run specific module tests
gradle :foundations:test
gradle :oop-core:test
gradle :design-patterns:test
```

### Example Outputs

**Foundations Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=foundations -PmainClass=StringFormatting
```

**OOP Core Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=oop-core -PmainClass=ModernJavaFeatures
```

**Design Patterns Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=design-patterns -PmainClass=DatabaseConnection
```

## Learning Progression

### Arc 1: Foundations to OOP (Videos 1-12)
Start with a simple Employee class that evolves:
- Videos 1-3: Basic syntax with employee examples
- Video 4: Scanner input for employee data
- Videos 5-6: Employee roster using 2D arrays
- Video 7: File I/O for employee data persistence
- Videos 8-9: Proper encapsulation and composition
- Videos 10-11: Modern Java features (var, records)
- Video 12: Reflection examples

### Arc 2: Design Patterns (Videos 13-15)
Enhance the system with patterns:
- **Singleton**: Database connection manager
- **Strategy**: Different salary calculation algorithms
- **Factory**: Create different employee types

### Arc 3: SOLID Principles (Videos 16-17)
Refactor for better design:
- **SRP**: Split monolithic classes
- **OCP**: Add new employee types without modification

### Arc 4: Production Ready (Videos 18-26)
Transform into enterprise application:
- Code quality, logging, testing
- Web services and REST APIs
- Security and validation
- Microservices architecture

## Key Features

### 🔄 **Connected Learning**
- Each concept builds on previous examples
- Consistent Employee/Department theme throughout
- Natural progression from simple to complex

### 💻 **Modern Java (2025)**
- Java 21 features (records, pattern matching, text blocks)
- Latest Spring Boot 3.5.3 patterns
- Modern dependency management with BOMs
- Best practices and defensive programming

### 🧪 **Comprehensive Testing**
- JUnit 5.11 with BOM management
- AssertJ fluent assertions
- Mockito 5.18 with BOM
- High test coverage for core modules

### 🏗️ **Enterprise Patterns**
- SOLID principles demonstrations
- Design patterns with practical implementations
- Scalable architecture examples

## Test Results & Module Status

### ✅ Streamlined Project Results (95% Pass Rate)
- **foundations**: 13/13 tests passing (100%) - All basic concepts with comprehensive exercises
- **oop-core**: 13/13 tests passing (100%) - Complete OOP with Java 21 features  
- **design-patterns**: 12/15 tests passing (80%) - Practical pattern implementations
- **solid-principles**: Working code examples (100%) - SOLID principles demonstrations

**Total: 38/41 tests passing (95% pass rate) + working SOLID examples**

### 📹 Video Content Coverage
**27 production-ready videos covering essential Java skills:**
- **Videos 1-7 + Bonus 7B**: Java fundamentals (syntax, I/O, arrays, loops) + Modern NIO.2
- **Videos 8-12**: Object-oriented programming and modern Java features
- **Videos 13-15**: Essential design patterns (Singleton, Strategy, Factory)
- **Videos 16-17**: SOLID design principles (SRP, OCP)
- **Videos 18-19**: Refactoring and logging best practices
- **Videos 20-23**: Advanced topics (REST APIs, Security, Cryptography)
- **Videos 24-26**: Enterprise topics (Git workflows, Microservices, Reactive programming)

### 🎬 Production Tools
- **Slide Naming Convention**: All slides use `slides_XX_topic_name.md` format for easy reference
- **Script Teleprompter Conversion**: Use `.claude/commands/script2text.md` to convert scripts
  - Command: `/script2text <topic_number>` (e.g., `/script2text 01` or `/script2text 7b`)
  - Outputs clean text file `script.txt` ready for Elgato Prompter

### 📁 Supporting Files and Documentation
**Complete project resources for video production:**
- **git-workflows/** - Git configuration examples and workflow documentation
- **.github/** - Professional CI/CD pipeline and PR templates  
- **scripts/** - 27 professional video scripts with scene structure
- **slides/** - Comprehensive slide presentations for all topics

### 🎯 Benefits of Streamlined Approach
- **100% functional codebase** - every module compiles and runs
- **Comprehensive test coverage** - 92% pass rate with working demonstrations
- **Clear scope** - focused on core Java skills that developers actually need
- **Production-ready examples** - code that can be used immediately in real projects

## Dependencies & BOMs

### Core Dependencies (All Modules)
```gradle
// Using BOMs for consistent version management
testImplementation platform('org.junit:junit-bom:5.11.0')
testImplementation platform('org.mockito:mockito-bom:5.18.0')
implementation platform('com.fasterxml.jackson:jackson-bom:2.19.1')
```

### Module-Specific Dependencies (Streamlined)
- **foundations**: Apache Commons IO 2.19.0, SLF4J 2.0.17, Logback 1.5.18
- **oop-core**: Jackson 2.19.1 (via jackson-bom)
- **design-patterns**: H2 Database 2.3.232 for singleton pattern demonstration

## Video Production Notes

### Video Production Highlights (2025)
**All topics ready for recording with professional production values:**

#### **Content Quality**
- **Latest 2025 technology stack** - Students learn current industry standards
- **Modern dependency management** - BOM usage and best practices  
- **Production-ready examples** - Code developers can use immediately
- **Self-contained topics** - Perfect for skill-gap filling approach

#### **Production Ready Features**
- **Professional script formatting** - Scene structure with timing
- **Coordinated slide references** - No confusion during filming
- **Consistent speaker attribution** - "Host:" format throughout
- **Verified slide counts** - All references match actual slides

#### **Recording Flexibility**
- **Any order recording** - Each topic is self-contained
- **Skip complexity** - Topics designed for jumping around
- **Immediate applicability** - Developers get usable knowledge
- **Modern Java features** - Records, pattern matching, text blocks throughout

## Modern Development Practices

### BOM (Bill of Materials) Usage
The project demonstrates modern dependency management:
```gradle
// Benefits of BOMs:
// - Version consistency across related dependencies
// - Simplified dependency management
// - Conflict resolution
// - Easy ecosystem updates
```

### 2025 Technology Choices
- **Spring Boot 3.5.3** - Latest features and security updates
- **JUnit 5.11** - Enhanced Java 21+ support
- **Modern validation** - Jakarta EE 11 compliance
- **Latest tooling** - Gradle 8.14.2 with Java 24 support

## Contributing

This project is designed for educational content creation. Each module should:
- Build upon previous concepts
- Include comprehensive examples
- Provide clear learning objectives
- Maintain the employee management theme
- Use latest 2025 best practices

## License

Educational content for O'Reilly Java skills video series.

Commit message:

refactor: Simplify object design with Java records and enhance code structure
- Replaced traditional POJOs (`Address`, `Department`, `Employee`) with Java `record` implementations for cleaner, more concise, and immutable designs.
- Grouped updated classes into `com.oreilly.javaskills.oop.hr` package to improve cohesion and maintainability.
- Added `CompositionExercise` to showcase best practices in object composition with methods demonstrating relationships between `Address`, `Department`, and `Employee`.
- Created `CompositionExerciseTest` with comprehensive tests to validate object interactions and composition structure using the new class designs.

README.md, after:

# Java Skills Teaching Project

A comprehensive multi-module Gradle project designed for Java skills video content. This project demonstrates essential Java concepts through practical examples using a consistent Employee Management System theme, covering 26+ topics from basic syntax to advanced architecture patterns.

## Project Overview

This project is structured as a Gradle multi-module build with Java 21, designed for **skill-gap filling** where developers can jump to specific topics they need to learn. Each topic provides complete, immediately applicable knowledge with production-ready code examples.

## 🎬 Production Status: READY FOR RECORDING

**All content complete with professional video production formatting:**
- ✅ **27 complete video topics** with comprehensive slides, scripts, and working code
- ✅ **Professional slide naming** with topic numbers (e.g., `slides_01_naming_conventions.md`)
- ✅ **Custom script2text command** for teleprompter conversion (`/script2text <number>`)
- ✅ **Working code examples** for every concept demonstrated
- ✅ **No production blockers** - all slide references verified and coordinated

## 🚀 Modern Java 21 Approach

**All code and slides showcase current Java best practices:**
- ✅ **Java 21 LTS features** - var, text blocks, records, switch expressions, pattern matching
- ✅ **Modern syntax throughout** - List.of(), String.formatted(), enhanced enums
- ✅ **Visual slide enhancements** - Color-highlighted naming conventions (#00D4FF)
- ✅ **Progressive disclosure** - Proper v-click sequencing for better presentation flow
- ✅ **Split content appropriately** - No slide overflow issues, readable formatting
- ✅ **Production-quality code** - Eliminates duplication, follows current best practices

## 📊 Slides and Presentations

The project includes comprehensive Slidev-powered slides for all 26+ topics:

### Foundations Topics (1-7 + Bonus 7B)
All slides follow the **new naming convention** with topic numbers for easy reference:
- **slides_01_naming_conventions.md** - Java naming standards and conventions
- **slides_02_escape_characters.md** - String escape sequences and special characters
- **slides_03_operator_precedence.md** - Expression evaluation and precedence rules
- **slides_04_scanner_input.md** - Console input with Scanner class
- **slides_05_nested_loops.md** - Nested loops for complex data processing (patterns, pairing, duplicates)
- **slides_06_2d_arrays.md** - Two-dimensional arrays for tabular data (quarterly sales analysis)
- **slides_07_file_writer.md** - Traditional file I/O with FileWriter/BufferedWriter
- **slides_07b_modern_file_io.md** - **BONUS**: Modern NIO.2 file operations

### Intermediate Topics (8-18)
- **slides_08_access_modifiers.md** - Java visibility and encapsulation
- **slides_09_composition.md** - Object composition and has-a relationships
- **slides_10_var_keyword.md** - Local variable type inference in Java 10+
- **slides_11_records.md** - Java records for immutable data
- **slides_12_reflection_api.md** - Runtime class inspection and manipulation
- **slides_13_singleton_pattern.md** - Thread-safe singleton implementations
- **slides_14_strategy_pattern.md** - Strategy pattern for algorithm selection
- **slides_15_factory_pattern.md** - Factory pattern for object creation
- **slides_16_srp.md** - Single Responsibility Principle
- **slides_17_ocp.md** - Open/Closed Principle
- **slides_18_refactoring.md** - Code refactoring best practices

### Advanced Topics (19-26)
- **slides_19_logging_frameworks.md** - SLF4J, Logback, and modern logging
- **slides_20_rest_api_consumer.md** - HTTP client and REST API consumption
- **slides_21_rest_service_creator.md** - Spring Boot REST service creation
- **slides_22_input_validation.md** - Security validation and XSS/SQL injection prevention
- **slides_23_cryptographic_apis.md** - Encryption, hashing, and digital signatures
- **slides_24_git_collaboration.md** - Version control and team workflows
- **slides_25_microservices.md** - Distributed systems with Spring Boot
- **slides_26_reactive_programming.md** - Async programming with Project Reactor

### Video Scripts (Production Ready)
- **scripts/** directory contains 27 professional video scripts
- **All scripts formatted** with scene structure and proper slide callouts
- **Split topics** 5&6 available as separate scripts for individual videos
- **Bonus topic 7B** for modern NIO.2 file operations included
- **Custom teleprompter conversion** using `/script2text <number>` command
- **package.json** - Slidev dependencies and build scripts

### Running Slides
```bash
npm install          # Install Slidev dependencies
npm run dev         # Start development server with hot reload
npm run build       # Build static presentation
npm run export      # Export to PDF
```

## Module Structure

**Organized into 6 modules covering 27 video topics with 100% functional code:**

### 📚 **foundations** - Basic Java Concepts (Videos 1-7 + Bonus 7B)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Fully Tested (10/10 tests passing)**

- **com.oreilly.javaskills.NamingConventions.java** - Proper Java naming conventions with good/bad examples
- **StringFormatting.java** - String concatenation, formatting, text blocks, StringBuilder, String.join(), StringJoiner, escape characters, SLF4J logging
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.OperatorPrecedenceTest.java** - JUnit tests demonstrating operator precedence rules with arithmetic, boolean, assignment, ternary, increment/decrement, modulus, and Math.pow() examples
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeInput.java** - Scanner input with try-with-resources, robust validation loops, and user-friendly error handling for all data types
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.NestedLoopsDemo.java** - Nested loops without 2D arrays (mentorship pairing, schedules, duplicates)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.PatternPrinting.java** - Visual pattern creation exercise (triangles, diamonds, checkerboards)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeRoster.java** - 2D arrays for tabular data with nested loop processing
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.TwoDArrayExercise.java** - Quarterly sales analysis using 2D arrays (row/column totals, growth rates)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.EmployeeFileWriter.java** - Traditional file I/O (CSV, JSON with text blocks, Apache Commons IO)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.FileWriterExercise.java** - Traditional file I/O exercise (reports, logs, CSV, text blocks comparison)
- **EmployeeLogger.java** - Comprehensive logging examples with SLF4J/Logback, MDC, different log levels
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.ModernEmployeeFileManager.java** - **BONUS**: Modern NIO.2 file operations (Java 7+)
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.ModernFileIOExercise.java** - Modern NIO.2 exercise (one-line operations, streams, directory walking)
- **FileIOComparison.java** - Side-by-side comparison of traditional vs modern file I/O approaches
- **EmployeeApiClient.java** - HTTP client for consuming REST APIs (Java 11+ HttpClient)
- **RestServiceConcepts.java** - REST service patterns and concepts demonstration
- **InputValidation.java** - Security validation, XSS/SQL injection prevention
- **CryptographicAPIs.java** - Encryption, hashing, digital signatures (PBKDF2, AES, RSA)
- **MicroservicesConcepts.java** - Microservices patterns (service discovery, load balancing, circuit breaker)
- **ReactiveConcepts.java** - Reactive programming patterns (streams, backpressure, composition)

### 🏗️ **oop-core** - Object-Oriented Programming (Videos 8-12)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Fully Tested (15/15 tests passing)**

- **Employee.java** - Encapsulation, validation, business logic
- **Address.java** - Composition example with proper validation
- **Department.java** - Has-a relationships, collections, business methods
- **ModernJavaFeatures.java** - var keyword, records, pattern matching, text blocks
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.oop.exercise.AccessModifiersExercise.java** - Try It Out exercise for Video 08 with BankAccount encapsulation example and TODO placeholders
- **com.oreilly.javaskills.oop.exercise.CompositionExercise.java** - Try It Out exercise for Video 09 with Company/Department/Employee composition examples and task/solution structure

### 🎨 **design-patterns** - Design Patterns (Videos 13-15)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Mostly Tested (12/15 tests passing)**

- **DatabaseConnection.java** - Thread-safe Singleton pattern
- **SalaryCalculator.java** - Strategy pattern (Hourly, Salaried, Commission)
- **EmployeeFactory.java** - Factory pattern (Developer, Manager, Intern, Sales)

**Note**: 3 minor database connection test failures are non-critical - all pattern demonstrations work perfectly for video content.

### ⚖️ **solid-principles** - SOLID Design Principles (Videos 16-17)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Functional (working code examples)**

- **SRPEmployeeService.java** - Single Responsibility Principle with separated concerns
- **OpenClosedPrinciple.java** - Open/Closed Principle with extensible employee types

### 🌐 **web-services** - Spring Boot REST & Reactive (Videos 20, 25-26)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Builds Successfully**

- **WebServicesApplication.java** - Spring Boot 3.5.3 main application
- **EmployeeApiClient.java** - HTTP client for consuming REST APIs (Java 11+ HttpClient)
- **MicroservicesDemo.java** - Spring Cloud microservices patterns (Eureka, Circuit Breaker, etc.)
- **ReactiveDemo.java** - Project Reactor examples (Mono, Flux, WebFlux)

### 🔒 **security** - Security Layered onto Web Services (Videos 22-23)
**Status: ✅ Complete & Builds Successfully**

- **SecurityApplication.java** - Spring Boot Security main application
- **InputValidation.java** - XSS/SQL injection prevention techniques
- **CryptographicAPIs.java** - PBKDF2, AES, RSA encryption and digital signatures
- **SecurityController.java** - REST endpoints demonstrating security integration

## Technology Stack (2025 Latest)

### Core Framework Versions
- **Java**: 21 (LTS)
- **Spring Boot**: 3.5.3 (Latest 2025)
- **Gradle**: 8.14.2 (June 2025)

### Testing with BOMs (Best Practice)
```gradle
// Modern dependency management using BOMs
testImplementation platform('org.junit:junit-bom:5.11.0')
testImplementation platform('org.mockito:mockito-bom:5.18.0')
testImplementation 'org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter'
testImplementation 'org.mockito:mockito-core'
```

### Key Libraries
- **Jackson**: 2.19.1 (with jackson-bom)
- **SLF4J**: 2.0.17
- **Logback**: 1.5.18
- **AssertJ**: 3.26.3
- **Apache Commons IO**: 2.19.0

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
- Java 21 or higher
- Gradle 8.14+ (or use included wrapper)

### Running the Project

```bash
# Build all modules
gradle build

# Run specific examples
gradle runExample -Pmodule=foundations -PmainClass=com.oreilly.javaskills.NamingConventions
gradle runExample -Pmodule=oop-core -PmainClass=ModernJavaFeatures
gradle runExample -Pmodule=design-patterns -PmainClass=StrategyPatternDemo

# Run tests
gradle test

# Run specific module tests
gradle :foundations:test
gradle :oop-core:test
gradle :design-patterns:test
```

### Example Outputs

**Foundations Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=foundations -PmainClass=StringFormatting
```

**OOP Core Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=oop-core -PmainClass=ModernJavaFeatures
```

**Design Patterns Module:**
```bash
gradle runExample -Pmodule=design-patterns -PmainClass=DatabaseConnection
```

## Learning Progression

### Arc 1: Foundations to OOP (Videos 1-12)
Start with a simple Employee class that evolves:
- Videos 1-3: Basic syntax with employee examples
- Video 4: Scanner input for employee data
- Videos 5-6: Employee roster using 2D arrays
- Video 7: File I/O for employee data persistence
- Videos 8-9: Proper encapsulation and composition
- Videos 10-11: Modern Java features (var, records)
- Video 12: Reflection examples

### Arc 2: Design Patterns (Videos 13-15)
Enhance the system with patterns:
- **Singleton**: Database connection manager
- **Strategy**: Different salary calculation algorithms
- **Factory**: Create different employee types

### Arc 3: SOLID Principles (Videos 16-17)
Refactor for better design:
- **SRP**: Split monolithic classes
- **OCP**: Add new employee types without modification

### Arc 4: Production Ready (Videos 18-26)
Transform into enterprise application:
- Code quality, logging, testing
- Web services and REST APIs
- Security and validation
- Microservices architecture

## Key Features

### 🔄 **Connected Learning**
- Each concept builds on previous examples
- Consistent Employee/Department theme throughout
- Natural progression from simple to complex

### 💻 **Modern Java (2025)**
- Java 21 features (records, pattern matching, text blocks)
- Latest Spring Boot 3.5.3 patterns
- Modern dependency management with BOMs
- Best practices and defensive programming

### 🧪 **Comprehensive Testing**
- JUnit 5.11 with BOM management
- AssertJ fluent assertions
- Mockito 5.18 with BOM
- High test coverage for core modules

### 🏗️ **Enterprise Patterns**
- SOLID principles demonstrations
- Design patterns with practical implementations
- Scalable architecture examples

## Test Results & Module Status

### ✅ Streamlined Project Results (95% Pass Rate)
- **foundations**: 13/13 tests passing (100%) - All basic concepts with comprehensive exercises
- **oop-core**: 15/15 tests passing (100%) - Complete OOP with Java 21 features + Try It Out exercises for videos 08 & 09
- **design-patterns**: 12/15 tests passing (80%) - Practical pattern implementations
- **solid-principles**: Working code examples (100%) - SOLID principles demonstrations

**Total: 40/43 tests passing (93% pass rate) + working SOLID examples**

### 📹 Video Content Coverage
**27 production-ready videos covering essential Java skills:**
- **Videos 1-7 + Bonus 7B**: Java fundamentals (syntax, I/O, arrays, loops) + Modern NIO.2
- **Videos 8-12**: Object-oriented programming and modern Java features
- **Videos 13-15**: Essential design patterns (Singleton, Strategy, Factory)
- **Videos 16-17**: SOLID design principles (SRP, OCP)
- **Videos 18-19**: Refactoring and logging best practices
- **Videos 20-23**: Advanced topics (REST APIs, Security, Cryptography)
- **Videos 24-26**: Enterprise topics (Git workflows, Microservices, Reactive programming)

### 🎬 Production Tools
- **Slide Naming Convention**: All slides use `slides_XX_topic_name.md` format for easy reference
- **Script Teleprompter Conversion**: Use `.claude/commands/script2text.md` to convert scripts
  - Command: `/script2text <topic_number>` (e.g., `/script2text 01` or `/script2text 7b`)
  - Outputs clean text file `script.txt` ready for Elgato Prompter

### 📁 Supporting Files and Documentation
**Complete project resources for video production:**
- **git-workflows/** - Git configuration examples and workflow documentation
- **.github/** - Professional CI/CD pipeline and PR templates  
- **scripts/** - 27 professional video scripts with scene structure
- **slides/** - Comprehensive slide presentations for all topics

### 🎯 Benefits of Streamlined Approach
- **100% functional codebase** - every module compiles and runs
- **Comprehensive test coverage** - 92% pass rate with working demonstrations
- **Clear scope** - focused on core Java skills that developers actually need
- **Production-ready examples** - code that can be used immediately in real projects

## Dependencies & BOMs

### Core Dependencies (All Modules)
```gradle
// Using BOMs for consistent version management
testImplementation platform('org.junit:junit-bom:5.11.0')
testImplementation platform('org.mockito:mockito-bom:5.18.0')
implementation platform('com.fasterxml.jackson:jackson-bom:2.19.1')
```

### Module-Specific Dependencies (Streamlined)
- **foundations**: Apache Commons IO 2.19.0, SLF4J 2.0.17, Logback 1.5.18
- **oop-core**: Jackson 2.19.1 (via jackson-bom)
- **design-patterns**: H2 Database 2.3.232 for singleton pattern demonstration

## Video Production Notes

### Video Production Highlights (2025)
**All topics ready for recording with professional production values:**

#### **Content Quality**
- **Latest 2025 technology stack** - Students learn current industry standards
- **Modern dependency management** - BOM usage and best practices  
- **Production-ready examples** - Code developers can use immediately
- **Self-contained topics** - Perfect for skill-gap filling approach

#### **Production Ready Features**
- **Professional script formatting** - Scene structure with timing
- **Coordinated slide references** - No confusion during filming
- **Consistent speaker attribution** - "Host:" format throughout
- **Verified slide counts** - All references match actual slides

#### **Recording Flexibility**
- **Any order recording** - Each topic is self-contained
- **Skip complexity** - Topics designed for jumping around
- **Immediate applicability** - Developers get usable knowledge
- **Modern Java features** - Records, pattern matching, text blocks throughout

## Modern Development Practices

### BOM (Bill of Materials) Usage
The project demonstrates modern dependency management:
```gradle
// Benefits of BOMs:
// - Version consistency across related dependencies
// - Simplified dependency management
// - Conflict resolution
// - Easy ecosystem updates
```

### 2025 Technology Choices
- **Spring Boot 3.5.3** - Latest features and security updates
- **JUnit 5.11** - Enhanced Java 21+ support
- **Modern validation** - Jakarta EE 11 compliance
- **Latest tooling** - Gradle 8.14.2 with Java 24 support

## Contributing

This project is designed for educational content creation. Each module should:
- Build upon previous concepts
- Include comprehensive examples
- Provide clear learning objectives
- Maintain the employee management theme
- Use latest 2025 best practices

## License

Educational content for O'Reilly Java skills video series.
